Zealand, and we can see you there, Danette.
Kia ora.
Welcome to the select committee.
Look, you have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission. Thank you.
Thank you. So tēnā koutou katoa. Thank you for the opportunity to
speak. My name, as you heard, is Danette Whetā.
I'm representing the Animal Justice Party, Aotearoa, New Zealand.
We are a political party committed to advocating for the rights, welfare,
and protection of animals. So we oppose the Environment's
Disestablishment Amendment Bill.
But firstly, I will acknowledge the government's intent to make improvements across
housing, infrastructure, and the environment.
They genuinely do have complex challenges, and integrated
thinking does have real value. So this proposal
is just not an administration restructure, it is a decision
about how environmental protection is prioritized
within government, and whether it remains a clear, independent voice.
So removing that independence and placing those responsibilities within the
broader ministry does create tension.
Addressing housing and infrastructure challenges cannot come at the
expense of environmental protection.
So you're asking the same ministry to build the motorway and protect the wetland
that the motorway destroys. That's not coordination, that's a conflict
of interest written into an org chart.
These portfolios are not neutral.
They are among the primary drivers of habitat destruction,
freshwater and ecosystem decline.
So the government has suggested that this change will improve
coordination. However, coordination already occurs and can be
strengthened with process. So disestablishing a
dedicated ministry is not required to achieve
that. As an experienced senior leader, I can advise structural
change does cost time and a lot of money and doesn't fix problems.
I recommend identifying the root cause of the issues and providing solutions to
address them. Now, importantly, environmental protection and
animal welfare are inseparable, so animals rely on
stable ecosystems for survival. That's their food, shelter, breeding, and
safety, and when these systems are weakened, it's animals who pay the
price. We've already seen this. Aotearoa is facing
ongoing biodiversity loss and environmental pressure, and globally, we
know that ecosystem decline is one of the leading drivers of species
decline. And there are broader implications.
So New Zealand's reputation is tightly close to how
we care for our environment, and that reputation underpins trust in our
clean, green billion-dollar image.
Equally important is accountability, so a standalone ministry
provides a clear line of responsibility when things go wrong.
So 70% of freshwater fish are threatened with extinction
or at risk, 78% of native land
birds and 93% of native frogs and
94% of native reptiles are threatened or at risk.
Nearly half of our monitored river sites fail to meet E.
coli safe drinking water standards, and half of our lakes are in
poor or degraded health due to nutrient contamination.
The ministry has been responsible for bringing this kind of clear,
evidence-based reporting to light, and when that
voice is absorbed, there is a real risk of this level of
transparency and visibility being diminished over time.
So we urge you to protect this proposal and instead of broad structural
change, the focus should be on targeted, practical improvements that
strengthen environmental outcomes.
We have a responsibility to do better. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Danette, for your submission.
Appreciate your time. It appears we have no questions, but
we have got your written submission as well.
Well, it's a very clear submission.
Yeah, very clear, very passionate.
So we appreciate your time this morning. Thank you.
Yeah. Kia ora.
So we will now move to Jenny Easton.
Who
I believe is joining us by-- Oh, there we go. Jenny, we can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Look, you've got five minutes with us, so in the essence of time, we'll hand it
over to you to talk us through your submission.
Thank you.
I began my
written submission by explaining how important MFE's technical
knowledge, independent voice, and international standing were for
me, a resource scientist with Tasman District Council, which
is a small unitary authority covering mainly rural
land and a raft of complex contaminated historic sites.
MFE scientists established the Contaminated Sites
Remediation Fund for the cleanup of the Māpua fruit growers'
chemical site. They also provided nationwide
technical advice across, and access to high temperature
incineration in France through the Basel Convention for
the disposal of hazardous waste such as DDT,
dieldrin, PCBs, from the redundant agrochemical
collection. And without this technical support from MFE,
farmers and industries would not have supported this drive by
councils to remove toxic waste for liability
issues.
The parameters for environmental reporting are complex.
Ozone layer protection, waste minimization all require
specialist technical knowledge, which was provided by
MFE staff.
Now I question, would this still be available if MFE staff
were buried inside a mega ministry?
And I seriously doubt that for the following reasons.
A well-funded standalone ministry has a louder,
stronger, more authoritative voice, and it can take
environmental concerns to the Cabinet table.And this makes
it possible to recruit and retain high-quality
staff and preserve the status of the ministry, build
institutional knowledge, and with the status and professional
relationships, have access to overseas experts for the
emerging issues, those unknowns which are arriving here
soon. And this status and mana will be lost if the
Secretary for the Environment functions are given to the
CEO of the mega ministry.
And then there's the climate work.
The staff at MFE already have a battle to provide
advice and policies to meet our climate responsibilities for
emission reduction when the Climate Commission's advice is not
accepted and the ETS has been altered in such a way
it's no longer effective. We need to move to a low
carbon economy and protect the carbon sinks, and we
need the ministry staff to guide us.
Work on climate adaptation plan is very complex
and politically challenging, and with the
actual process of merging the ministry, that will take the
staff's focus away from these projects, and
without a clear national directive, local and central
government staff are managing the recovery from climatic
weather events in a very ad hoc manner.
And as you know, this is unsustainable, it's very expensive,
and it's inherently unfair.
MFE is far too important for our future to merge and
weaken its voice for nature and our physical and natural environment.
We need its independent oversight to support,
protect, and improve our economy and wellbeing.
And as a last note, I hope that the NEB and planning bills
are changed to include a goal for emission reduction
targets,
goals, and plans under the Climate Change Response Act
2002. If this doesn't happen, the role of
MFE will be even more challenging and difficult if they're
part of a mega ministry where their voice will be
diluted as they compete with transport and urban
development. Yes, I've finished.
Thank you very much, Jenny, for your submission
today.
We appreciate your time
and the effort that you've made to provide that submission.
Yep.
So thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you. It's very helpful.
Very helpful.
Good point about the screening.
Thank you. Thank you, Jenny.
So now we'll move on to our next submission today,
Bruce Gilkison.
Why do I keep back?
So we just got Bruce popping up. There we go.
Bruce, welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to open up
with some opening remarks and talk you through your submission, talk us through
your submission. Oh,
we just got something to share with us there. Yes, brilliant.
Thank you. Over to you.
Okay. Kia ora, and thank you very much.
I am with Paul Martin.
So my background is in business and accounting.
His is in health and disability, and he will speak
if I get tongue-tied.
We will say we disagree with the disestablishment proposal, but if
that is to proceed, we will have some suggestions in relation to
how that option might be improved.
So that's the second slide we're looking at there.
I also do some research and writing on environmental issues, mainly for
chartered accountants in New Zealand and Australia
for their monthly journal.
The image is an early involvement from 26 years ago.
I've included it here for the strong cross-party support it
attracted.
It was launched by Sir Geoffrey Palmer and included a
foreword from Simon Upton, who was then Minister for the
Environment.
I'm pleased to say that climate and nature are now a central focus for
Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand.
Next slide, please.
Talking about urgency,
this is the Planetary Boundaries framework, which many of you will be
familiar with, largely developed by scientists at the Stockholm
Resilience Centre.
Seven of the nine safe global limits have now been
transgressed, so it's urgent.
Climate is one of the boundaries. Despite some progress recently, the rate of
emissions globally is still speeding up. A few comments.
As we now know, the past 11 years are the hottest on record.
Everything is connected. Some impacts cause feedback loops,
resulting in further damage elsewhere.
So heat can lead to forest fires and dieback, which
releases carbon, which leads to more heat.
Limits once breached can be irreversible, and meanwhile,
every fraction of a degree really matters.
Next,
the globally trusted UK-based Institute
and Faculty of Actuaries, using methods tried and
trusted to manage and advise on trillions of dollars in
pensions, investments, and insurance,
has concluded that risks to planetary
solvency have been hugely
underestimatedAnd that without rapid
action on climate and environmental risks, the
global economy could face a 50% loss in
GDP, and yes, that's
50%, between 2070 and
2090.
So they're saying it's even worse than we thought. Sorry.
And that better information, clear limits, and better policies
are urgently needed everywhere. The report is a call to
action and is highly recommended. Next, please.
Here I'm saying that extra costs to retain
MFE's independence, and I don't know what they are or indeed what
the benefits are, will be hugely offset by
environmental
and other benefits.
So
first, there is ample evidence of potential gains, and
I've focused here mainly on dollars, not just on environmental
benefits.
Here are two sources for now.
Modeling by Deloitte New Zealand showed that decisive climate action
could add 64 billion to our economy by 2050.
And a report from the Sustainable Business Council and Climate
Leaders Coalition this week shows that climate-friendly
technology could see GDP grow by 22
billion per year by 2035.
It could also help prevent declines in agriculture and tourism revenue.
Some other benefits I've noted here are savings from
mitigating and preparing wisely for future climate damage,
avoiding possible reputational damage
and risks to free trade agreements from inadequate
emissions progress, and avoiding some future significant health
costs.
For each of those, it's better and cheaper to protect something rather than try to
fix it later.
MFE's independence, expertise, clarity of purpose,
and ability to act and advise transparently are valuable and
needed like never before.
Slide, please.
I'm wondering if MFE is to merge,
is the new ministry the right place for it?
And I'm just looking at
impacts and benefits from two major
blocks. So,
question is where could that expertise
provide most benefit?
And on this basis, though I'm not recommending this, there could potentially be
greater benefits in aligning with
the latter.
I consider that the merger should certainly proceed, but without
MFE, and at least not with more detailed research
into the benefits and risks for current and future New
Zealanders. Slide, please.
This one's a bit flippant, but I'm just talking about the
benefits of having an
independent
voice. So,
yeah, rather than have an environment
agency in one
section, but to better to act transparently, to be able to advise,
encourage, and guide all sectors, and particularly those
which are large emitters, have significant impacts, or are
presenting major opportunities for progress and better
outcomes.
Next, please.
I mentioned the
heading, which probably should have been headed Items to be
Addressed if the Bill Proceeds, and if we do this,
how do we make sure that nothing gets lost,
rather than the heading Amendments, because some of these are outside the bill
itself. For instance, some items are covered by the RMA
reforms currently underway.
The focus on the status of the Secretary for the Environment's role and the
priority of MFE's increasingly urgent climate and environmental
responsibilities are key concerns.
It's crucial that nothing diminishes or detracts from these, and there be
no loss of momentum through what could
be a turbulent period if the full merger were to occur
as proposed. As noted, I consider that the retention
of MFE as an independent ministry is likely to bring
about far better outcomes for people and planet.
And final slide, please.
That one
looks as if it got lost a bit at the top there.
But
with multiple and escalating impacts now inevitable,
this is the wrong time to risk weakening a clear and focused
and independent voice for the environment.
I consider that even with some refinement on the proposal, unless
compelling evidence is available to the contrary, a change
at this stage could result in disruption, dilution,
and diminished transparency.
Meanwhile, retaining and bolstering this voice, in my view, is the
best way to mitigate and prepare for negative impacts and to
plan for and seize significant future
opportunities.
New Zealanders, current and future, love and depend on their natural
environment for their livelihoods and their well-being.
Please support them. Thank you. We welcome any questions.
Thank you, Bruce, and thank you for those slides.
That's really useful and helpful. Look, we've got a couple of questions.
We'll go to Priyanka first.
Thank you. Thanks, Bruce. I've just got a quick question seeking
clarification around the first amendment that you have
suggested to explicitly prioritize environmental protection as a
primary function if this merger were to go ahead.
Other submitters have made the point that they feel that even though
the bill as it stands says that all the functions would
transfer over to the new ministry, that the focus on the natural
environment might fall away
as a result. So presumably, you are talking about prioritizing both the
natural and built environments in that amendment that you've suggested.
Yes.
Yeah.
Wanting to make sure that it's
protected and bolstered. There are a lot
of
threats coming. The next few years are going to
be
perhaps quite tumultuous, and certainly not wanting
anything to be lost there.
Thank you.
Thank you. And Rachel Brooking.
Oh, yes. Just a quick question. Thank you for the history and for your
involvement all that time ago.
I'm interested in the international experience you have, and you've just
said, "I believe it is just a matter of time before we are challenged by countries
and producers which are now far more environmentally focused than we are."
What countries do you think are far more environmentally focused now
than New Zealand is?
Yes, I'm probably referring there to
UK and EU,
which
certainly they have a strong focus, for instance, in our free trade
agreements on
not backing off on climate progress.
And
I think it could easily happen that
perhaps farmers in those areas might raise concerns.
And yeah, I think any further
changes there could put us at risk.
Thank you.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much, Bruce.
We've met time there with our submissions this morning, but we appreciate your
time and the really insightful, useful submission.
So thank you.
Thank you.
Like the pictures, the pictures of the All Blacks and the ...
I don't know if we won that one.
Yeah.
Thank you.
All right. Thanks.
I thought it was going to be that game with France.
Yeah.
Oh, yes.
Yeah. Thanks very much.
So moving on to our next submission this morning, Environment and
Conservation Organizations of Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Who are also joining us online and hopefully popping
through shortly.
There we go. Oh, we can
see you there, Barry. Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Look, you have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission, and then we'll open up for a few questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. Kia ora koutou. Thanks to the committee to
let us present
our submission. I assume you've had a read our submission already.
I'll introduce myself. I'm Barry Weber.
I'm the chairperson of the Environment Conservation Organizations.
As you've seen in our submission, ECO's had a long history and
involvement in this area. We were involved
in advocacy for the establishment of the Ministry of the Environment back in
the 1980s.
For those who don't know, that came out of the Environment Forum, which was
established in 1985, where a number of issues
clearly identified with the lack of environmental priority of the governments at
that stage and the failures that the Think Big projects had
occurred, and the costs and
losses that were associated with those projects on the
environment.
In addition, the lack of focus
on environmental issues generally and the idea that we need to bring in
together all the different green dots
in the different agencies at the time, and the Commission for the Environment, as
it then was, was only a agency with a cabinet
minute. It didn't have any statutory functions or
statutory basis for its decision-making.
So the Environment Act was a really important part of that, and I should note that
this is the 40th year of the Environment Act.
It was passed in December of 1986, so the Ministry for
the Environment,
if it still exists at the end of this year, would have reached its
40th year. So that's, I think, it's an important milestone
in environment policy in New Zealand that we should not forget.
So we're concerned about the lack of environmental focus.
You've heard from other submitters this morning about that, and we're concerned
about the lack of environmental focus of the government generally and the need
for recognition that the environment is a key important
part of
New Zealand in terms of our loss of biodiversity,
our state of the environment, which is declining, and we need to have a lot greater
focus on it. And we're concerned that this piece of legislation would make
and weaken that environmental focus.
We also note that yesterday the government released its priorities for
science funding, which also shows a huge reduction in environmental
science funding. And again, that doesn't augur
well for the future of New Zealand's environment or
the
government and other agencies making clear decisions on the environment, because
science funding is a key part of that equation.
We're also concerned that we're currently talking about this
bill, but a new position has been appointed.
The head of corrections has been appointed to this position of
running an agency which Parliament is yet to pass
legislationTo enforce. So it's a bit
of an odd way of doing things, and we hope that this is an open and transparent
process that Parliament is going through, and the executive isn't overriding its
parliamentary
mandate in that process.
We're also concerned that the Cabinet papers associated with this document and
this decision are heavily redacted, and I don't know whether Parliament
itself has actually looked at the full detail of those Cabinet papers
or asked for copies of the unredacted copies of those papers that were
released. And we would urge the select committee to
ask for those papers so that they can review all the documentation and the
reasons for the decisions being made.
The other problem is that the legislation itself misses
part of the role of the Ministry for the Environment and different
agencies. We haven't mentioned to it, but I would suggest that the drafters
look at the Fisheries Act, for example, as
one piece of legislation which mentions
the Ministry for the Environment, which isn't included.
And so there are potentially other examples.
We haven't looked through the full details, but clearly the draft of this
bill was done in a hurry without clear thought and
consideration of all the references to the environment agency in different
pieces of legislation.
We're concerned about the transparency of advice
that will be with this new agency. We've seen in other agencies where there's been
accumulation of different ministries, for example, Ministry for
Primary Industry. We've noticed the lack of transparency in terms of
some fisheries advice and the way that occurs within an
agency and the sort of priorities for funding within that
agency.
So it's really important that
whatever comes out of this process, that there's clear transparency between the
different parts, if it is combined, different parts of the agency,
so we can see where officials disagree or officials
agree and what priorities different parts of the agency have,
especially when they're
acting under different statutes.
That's a
clear summary of our submission. We don't
support this bill. We urge the select committee
not to
recommend this bill be passed, and that in fact,
that we move forward and reconsider the role of the Ministry for the Environment in
the future.
Thank you, Chair, and
I'm happy to answer any questions that the committee may have in
regard to our submission. Thanks.
Thank you, Barry. Look, we'll go first to Rachel Brooking.
Yeah, thanks, Barry, and thanks for reminding us of National's
blueprint, Cleaning Up Freshwater and the like.
I often go back to that document.
It does seem rather inconsistent with everything that we've seen before this
committee this term.
But my question for you is more specifically
on seven, where you talk about when the
Environment Act was passed, that there was supposed to be environmental impact
assessment provisions, and where you see that best sitting
into all of the environment scheme, also noting that
we've got the Planning Bill and the Natural Environment Bill in front of us too.
Well, I don't know whether the select committee have heard of the Environmental
Protection and Enhancement Procedures. Probably not.
They were established in the late '70s and revised
during the '80s.
They were wider than environmental assessment for projects.
They had
provisions for assessment of policies and
actions of agencies rather than just actual consent conditions.
So while the Resource Management Act might be argued to replace some of those
provisions of the Environmental Protection and Enhancement Procedures, not all the
provisions of those procedures were replaced.
And I'd urge the select committee to get yourself a copy of the EP
and EP procedures. I'm assuming that they'll be in Parliamentary
Library.
They're not something that you can find online.
I actually looked online to see whether I could find them, but you can't these
days.
They were actually a very forward-looking piece of document.
They were originally produced under the national government in the Muldoon
years and were revised later on
through the 1980s. And the original intention of the
Environment Act was that basically part three of the Environment Act
would contain the Environmental Protection and Enhancement Procedures, but that
never occurred. Despite
early decisions by Cabinet to do that, that was never proceeded with.
And I think that's a great omission,
because as I said, the Resource Management Act and other
legislation only fulfill
part of the provisions that the EP and EP procedures actually
covered. Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Barry.
We appreciate your submission today and your insights.
Lots of considerations to take into account there.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, committee.
Look forward to your decisions. Thanks.
So now we move on to our next submitter, the
Pirirakau Tribal Authority,
who are here with us in person. Welcome.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon now.
Look, you've got 10 minutes with us, but take your submission as
read, and if you'd like to just talk us through your main points, and then we'll
open up for a few questions. So over to you.
Ka pai.
Kia ora tatou. Tuatahi ake ka mihi ki a koutou, e te komiti
whiriwhiri, te komiti whaiti, i whakawātea mai te wāhi ki a mātou o te
Pirirakau ki te kōrero ki te kaupapa nei. Tēnā koutou.
Kia ora tātou. My name is Heta Gardiner.
I'm speaking on behalf of Pirirākau Tribal Authority as our
Kaihautū.
For generations, Pirirākau Hapū have been the kaitiaki of our rohe in the
western Bay of Plenty, and our connection with the whenua,
with our waters is more than just cultural.
This is fundamental to our very identity and survival.
So I'm here to speak in firm opposition to the environment, this
establishment of the Ministry of the Environment Amendment Bill.
We view this bill not just as a bureaucratic reshuffle, as has been suggested,
but as a direct, calculated attack on Māori rights and the
protection of Aotearoa's greatest asset, our
natural environment.
Tuatahi ake, the bill is in breach of Article 2 of Te Tiriti o Waitangi, which
guarantees us tino rangatiratanga over our taonga.
More specifically to us of Te Pirirākau, the bill threatens to
hollow out the Ngā Hapu o Ngāti Ranginui Claims Settlement Act
2025. That settlement was "a
living promise from the government on behalf of the Crown
to acknowledge the past wrongs and protect our taonga for future
generations." The Crown apologized for the unjust confiscation of
our lands and promised a new relationship based on
mutual trust. Yet here we are,
less than a year later,
watching the government unilaterally, without any external
consultation with Treaty partners,
getting ready to dismantle the very agency responsible for
upholding those relationships and protecting the aforementioned
taonga. A commitment made must be a commitment
kept. You can't deliver on Treaty settlements
if you scatter the expertise and relationships required to honor them.
We question the logic of merging ministries that appear to have
minimal intersecting areas of mutual alignment.
We also question the sense and value of having a mega
ministry in the first place.
These are entities, keeping in mind, that are tasked with
overseeing the most important areas in our society.
Throwing them together to make a mega ministry
seems like a knee-jerk reaction
to save money in the short term. When speaking of the
justification of the merge of several ministries, I've seen terms like
improved coordination be used, terms like align
policymaking across sectors,
terms like reduce duplication and bureaucracy.
This is political speak for downsizing.
Downsizing several different areas into one,
in this case ministries,
results
always in a dilution of expertise and ultimately a
reduction in financial support. We can't do that for the environment.
It's too important.
Having priorities such as economic development
and environmental protections competing with each other
within the same ministry
weakens the advancement of both of them.
And while we speak of economic development and financial responsibility,
defunding and deprioritizing the environment doesn't save us
money in the long term. It just pushes the bill that we all
ultimately have to pay down the road.
For example, Cyclone Gabrielle needed over $10 billion of
financial support for resilience and recovery.
The earthquakes in Kaikōura, billions of dollars needed
for recovery and resilience. The 2023 floods in Auckland,
billions of dollars needed for recovery and
resilience. And those are just some examples.
We live within an ecosystem here in Aotearoa that is heavily reliant on meat
exports, dairy exports, fruit exports that need a
functioning, not collapsing environment.
Tourism, agriculture, fisheries depend entirely
on clean water and a healthy environment.
For us at Pirirākau,
horticulture is a major source of income, and we worry
about what the space will look like in the absence of proactive
environmental leadership from our government and from
our ministries.
Saving millions now for it to only cost us billions
later, to me,
is not
sound economic strategy. It's fiscally irresponsible.
And there's much more at stake here, of course, than just money.
We in Te Pirirākau, we share our space with the moana, and there's grave
concern for our urupā and our people
in the case of a major weather event.
"Ko au te taiao, ko te taiao ko au" I am the environment, the environment is me.
This proverb
doesn't only encapsulate the relationship Māori have with the environment, but
also a pathway forward where we can both thrive.
And so I'll conclude my korero with the question of the government finds
itself in this situation, pushing against long-term
sustainability, pushing against environmental protections,
and pushing against
long-term economic sound decision-making,
then I would question the wisdom of that position.
And I will just conclude by saying, Te Pirirākau Tribal Authority
stand in opposition of this bill.
Kia ora tātou.
Thank you very much. Look, we've got a question from Cameron Luxton.
Yeah. Thank you, Heta.
Got a question. You talked about, I think the quote was, "It's hollowing out the
Ngāti Ranginui Crown Settlement Bill," and the relationship with the Crown.
Is the settlement with the Crown or the ministry?
Because I-
The Crown
... looking through this... Yeah.
So looking through the settlement bill, well-
There's no mention of the Ministry for the Environment
But the Ministry of Environment is the entity that oversees and
ultimately looks after the protections and that relationship.
A diminishing of the ministry, in our view, ultimately results in a
diminishing of the environment,
which is where that conflict occurs.
So would the Crown
ever be able to change the makeup of ministries
and not breach the Ngati Ranginui settlement bill?
Of course, but this is ultimately, again, as we said,
ultimately this bill will result in, as I said, a dilution of
expertise and a reduction of funds for the environment,
and that has an impact.
Yeah. So supplementary on this point.
So I think your point is, tell me, the question is, am I right or wrong
with what I'm saying? Is that all these issues on your back page here of your
bill go to the diminishment of environmental protections,
and it is because of that,
as a consequence of MFE
being abolished, that go to your
settlement issue. Is that right?
The ultimate point is that a diminishing of the
ministry diminishes the capabilities to look after the
environment. And by diminishing the capabilities to look after the environment and
our ability to look after our taonga,
that ultimately is the conflict.
Yeah. Which is much more eloquently put than my question. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your time today.
I appreciate your submission and your passion
as well. So thank you.
And
so we now call our next submitter, WWF New
Zealand, who are also here and joining us in person today.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You have five minutes with us, and so we'll just hand it
over to you to open up and talk us through your submission, and then we'll have
hopefully a few questions.
Great. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you all today.
I'm Jamie Fowler. I'm the conservation impact manager at WWF New Zealand, and I'm
here with Lillian Fougère, who's our principal policy advisor.
We understand that this bill doesn't change the core functions of the Ministry for
the Environment, but we are concerned about how those functions will operate
inside a much broader new ministry.
Bringing environment together with strong development, housing, transport, and
infrastructure mandates risks creating built-in conflicts that could
weaken the ministry's ability to carry out its core environmental protection role.
New Zealand's biodiversity is already in crisis, with some of the highest rates of
extinction in the world, driven by habitat loss, pollution,
and cumulative impacts.
The Ministry for the Environment currently provides essential safeguards for
nature. Those safeguards cannot be diluted by competing
goals like road construction or urban expansion.
As we know, nature underpins our health, our wellbeing, our climate resilience,
and our economy.
Primary industries and tourism rely heavily on healthy ecosystems,
and if the environmental mandate is weakened, those foundations erode and
future generations will bear that cost.
The Environment Act requires the ministry to consider things like ecosystem
health, threatened species, landscapes, areas of importance to tangata
whenua, pollution, natural hazards, hazardous
substances, and cumulative effects.
These are not optional extras. They are core
stewardship duties.
We are concerned that within a much larger ministry, these functions would be
overshadowed by the development priorities.
The bill doesn't provide clarity or safeguards to show how these tensions will be
managed. Without explicit direction, environmental protection risks
becoming secondary. We also challenge the assumption that this merger
will create efficiency. Combining such different mandates blurs
organizational purpose, confuses advice to ministers, shifts
conflicts to inside one agency rather than resolving them between
clear, specialized ministries. This is likely to slow
decisions, advice, and internal negotiations.
Far from creating efficiency, it risks making the system
less effective than what we have now.
WWF New Zealand does not support the bill or the merger as proposed.
However, if the merger proceeds, we strongly recommend three
things. First, strengthen the bill so environmental functions
cannot be weakened through secondary legislation or organizational restructuring.
Environmental protection, biodiversity, and ecosystem health must be explicitly
prioritized for the new priorities for the new ministry's purpose and
powers.
Second, ensure that the Secretary for the Environment keeps an independent,
authoritative role, able to give free and frank environmental advice,
supported by staff who have genuine environmental expertise and
experience.
This is particularly important in the context of the RMA replacement work, which
will take very many years to enact and implement.
Third, improve transparency and accountability.
The annual reporting, statutory environmental limits, and independent oversight
must be strong enough to prevent environmental outcomes being
compromised.
To conclude, Aotearoa's environment is globally unique and under immense pressure.
It needs strong, clear institutional guardianship, and we urge the committee
to ensure the bill and any related instruments explicitly protect the integrity of
the environmental mandate within the new ministry.
Thank you for your time, and we're happy to answer any inquiries.
Thank you very much for that submission.
Priyanka has the first question.
Thank you. You've mentioned in your written submission your
concerns around
the conflicts between development and environmental
protection, which seems to me to be quite similar to the trade-offs
that PCE has mentioned in his submission.
Would you go so far as he has to say that you would
suggest that MFE is left out of the merger?
I would. I think the transparency and visibility
of those trade-offs is incredibly important.
Mm-hmm.
The reason why MFE was
established in the first place was to drive the quality
decision making and informed decision making and evidence to
fully understand those impacts of our decisions on the environment, and that
still remains an important function.
And Rachel, just-
Yes.
To follow up.
Yeah.
So when you say there needs to be visibility, part of what he has said is that
the
risk is that the trade-offs would be managed within this mega ministry and not
elevated-
That's right
... to ministers, and that's what you mean by that statement?
That's right, yes. The contestable advice needs to be, yeah.
Thank you.
Explicit.
Thank you very much for your submission today.
We appreciate those considerations, so thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you.
So we now move to our next submitter,
Troy Baisden.
Troy, welcome to the Select Committee this afternoon.
Yeah.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through
your submission. Thank you.
Tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Thanks for hearing this.
I am an environmental scientist,
working across science and policy.
I've been on MFE's Interim Limits and Targets Advisory Group,
as well as the MB group that advised
government on the science system under the last group.
The areas I want to focus on here are the transparency of
science and research that tells us how the environment actually is and how it's
doing with the statutory functions
of the Secretary of the Environment and parts that were set up under the
original
environment legislation. That legislation was sort of world leading at
the time, and
is now the norm to have a Ministry for the Environment or a
similar environmental agency at a top level of government.
That shouldn't be a surprise to anyone, and bringing people like me to New Zealand
25 years ago from Ivy League universities in Berkeley
or simply looking after our trade and international
reputation is essential.
Having the role of the Ministry for the Environment within that is essential.
I think everybody can see that to some degree.
The question here is will this bill actually do what it says,
and what can be done around
making the process here as effective as possible?
I oppose the bill. I oppose
this establishment of the Ministry for the Environment.
I would've worn a tie if I believed that I could actually convince you to go back
on that.
However,
I think the more important thing here is something that, amongst others, the PCE
has identified. There are core things that happen within government
and core things that are set up in legislation where the Ministry for the
Environment is relatively unique.
My observation is that a lot of those go badly in
super ministries, and that's certainly what I've observed with the super ministries
like MB that have been created. I can see benefits from remixing the
planning functions of MFE with other ministries.
I can't see benefits from disestablishing
the roles of MFE as seen in making them more invisible in a
super ministry. There are two big problems to address, one of
which that I would really emphasize is making as much as
possible here reversible. So when it's not seen as working or a different
government comes in, it's relatively smooth to fix the parts that
aren't working and let the parts of the merger that maybe are working
continue.
One of the most important pieces of those for you to understand is the role of the
chief executive, and we've now seen a chief executive appointment.
And that person, as has come out in the media just in the last
day, does not give me confidence that this is going to proceed
as planned or successfully.
There's little more to say about that, so what I'll move to is the problem
with ministries.
You've probably seen this before.
I'll certainly leave it as an exhibit.
This is the unscrambling government diagram from the New Zealand Initiative.
And
how does science or reality negotiate this?
I would hand it to you that a lot of the problems we have can be fixed by
restructuring. But the restructuring might look more like this,
which is Norway. And in this model, you might see things like
climate, environment, and conservation put together rather
than environment, as we call it now,
put in with planning and building and
transport.
I think there's some very different functions there, and I support the
PCE's notion that these need to have a
competition at the table within Cabinet.
The last thing that I worry about, and I will encourage you to think about, and by
looking around the table, I think you can understand this without me explaining it
further. It's mentioned or is consistent with the New Zealand
Initiative's Unscrambling Government report,
and it's one of the other concerns about
restructurings like this that generate super ministries.
They generate accountability sinks, which make government function
worse rather than better.
So with that, I think that's really what I wanted to cover and we're close
to five minutes anyway. I mean question.
Yeah. Thank you, Troy. Look, we do have a question from Francesco.
Yes.
Cool.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chair.
Can you elaborate on what you mean by how this new ministry could
create an accountability sink with a concrete hypothetical example, if you could?
Wow.
Concrete hypothetical.
Yeah. So, the typical way these accountability things work is that
a decision is made, and it's not clear who's responsible for the
decision. So let's say that that has to do with the
DPSIR loop of monitoring the quality of, for example, fresh water,
and then making decisions about land use that relate to that.
If, in fact, we are losing track of who's supposed to be
monitoring fresh water and considering what that
actually means, as well as who's responsible for the return to policy,
that's an accountability
problem, and it's already a problem because that DPSIR loop does not
connect back until we implement the changes the
PCE recommended, which I think are still ongoing.
Thank you very much, Troy, for your submission today. Really appreciate that.
So thank you.
Yes. Thank you.
And if you get the Clarkson diagrams, that Norway one's interesting.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
And then with the other one, I think it's in the New Zealand initiative reports
that we already have. We now welcome
our next submitter, the Royal Forest and Bird Society of New
Zealand. Welcome, Richard, Erica.
Hello. How are you?
He's got a great memory.
Look, we-
We're back again.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your
submission. So thank you.
Thank you. Tēnā koutou katoa. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear again before you today. My name is Erica Tolman.
I'm acting CEO of Forest and Bird. We are Aotearoa
New Zealand's independent voice for nature, and we have more than a century of
experience advocating for biodiversity, fresh water, and the natural environment.
Look, our position is that we do not support this bill.
We recognize the value of better coordination across portfolios.
But disestablishing the Ministry for the Environment and embedding its statutory
functions within a large development-oriented super ministry creates
risks that outweigh any potential administrative benefits.
So we have a couple of key concerns.
First off is dilution of environmental leadership.
So the bill transfers MFE's statutory functions to a secretary within a
consolidated ministry,
as you're all aware. In practice, we say that that
will risk diluting time, focus, and institutional weight for
environmental stewardship.
Another issue is the conflicting mandates and weaker advice.
So embedding environmental statutory functions alongside mandates to promote
development, transport efficiency, and urban growth creates structural conflicts,
and we're particularly concerned with some of the drafting here.
So,
Clause 12 of the bill amends Section 32 of the Environment Act,
and it requires that the secretary considers those environmental
matters listed as far as practical.
Now, I recognize that that wording's already in the
Environment Act.
But, the problem here is that it's only going to apply to the secretary,
not all the officials that sit under that person.
And also, it is going to be weighed up in the ministry
against all the other competing directions.
So in our view, that will mean environmental considerations are
diluted.
Reduced transparency and contestability, you've already heard about that, so I'll
just skim over that, and again, the defunding risk you've heard already from the
last two submitters
about the potential for that. I'll hand over to Richard to carry on. Hi.
Kia ora, everybody. I'm Richard Cappy. I'm the Chief Advisor for Forest and Bird.
It's nice to see you all again. I think one of the things that we would flag for
the committee is that there is some significant timing and implementation
risks here that need to be taken into account.
This reform has been proposed, as you will know from the mahi that you've been
undertaking, while the environmental system is already undergoing
massive change. We've got generational changes happening to
the resource management system, including two new bills and
national directions. Those things are still being designed and will take
a number of years to actually embed and secure.
Furthermore, we have significant mahi taking place where much of the rubber
hits the road, the regulatory environments in our local and regional
government, where we are looking at potentially some significant reforms
in that space as well. The risks posed by
increasing this instability should not be understated.
There's that old adage that form should follow function.
We haven't actually determined what those functions truly are yet, let alone tested
them.
Yeah.
Yet we're looking at reshaping and fundamentally
shifting a lot of the expertise that
exists in this space. The institutional disruption that could take
place at the very time that you probably need that stability in order to make RM
reforms and regional and local government reforms successful should not be
understated. You will risk losing specialist staff,
you'll risk losing capability, and you'll risk losing institutional
knowledge. If you want RM3 to be successful and
endure, then you should think very carefully about whether doing this at
this particular time is the right idea.
I think it poses real risks to effective implementation
of significant changes that this government has already signaled that it
wishes to take forward.
So if the bill proceeds, what should be the minimum safeguards?
I think we've already said there should be statutory clarity, and as Erica
and others have said, it clearly established the role and authority of a dedicated
secretary for the environment. There should be strong obligations, including
explicit statutory duties on the consolidated ministry to give effect to
environmental principles, not optional or as far as
practicable.
There should be ring-fenced funding, transparent, dedicated funding lines for
environmental functions, and there should be visible contestable
adviceMechanisms to ensure that environmental advice
remains independent in practice and clearly visible to
ministers, parliament, and the public.
Finally, I think at a practical level, there are drafting improvements that would
need to be made and would
suggest the work done by EDS and around this makes a good starting point.
In summary, I think we're pretty clear that the committee should recommend against
the bill in its current form.
I think that risk around being able to drive forward RM3 is really, really
critical, and one that I haven't seen picked up or given due
consideration. If you were to proceed, I think the
PCE is correct, keep MFE out.
Certainly at this point in time,
we would agree with the parliamentary commissioner on that.
But we would have concerns about the two bills being split
across the ministry, so keeping part in with MFE and the risk with
MERT
or MERT or the Curt.
Because we've already flagged quite deep concerns about actually the
problematic nature of having two pieces of legislation for RM3 in the first place.
The reality is, and I guess I'm talking to the members of the coalition in a
sense, that if you're looking for
efficiency and you're looking for affordability and you're looking for
effectiveness, there are better ways to achieve that.
You can strengthen environmental leadership rather than subsume it.
There are interdepartmental boards and strengthened coordination mechanisms
that could be put in place.
Thank you for your time. Happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Richard and Erica, for that very clear submission.
Rachel has a question.
Yeah. Just if you can
spend a tiny little bit more time on the relationship to what you're
calling RM3, and that is the planning
bill being separate from the Natural
Environment Bill and the integration of the
resource management system and environment in the system and how it links with
this.
Sure.
So,
we have serious concerns about the ability
or actually inability to do integrated management with the way that
the two bills have been separated.
Biodiversity is one issue that is very
tricky to follow through the two bills and ensure that actually protections are
going to be, one, effective for the environment and, two,
actually efficient for resource users.
And that is, we can't see a way to easily
fix that. We weren't able to suggest any
fixes in our submissions on those bills because of the,
in our view, arbitrary split between
land and environment.
They are the same thing and, in our view, should be managed as one.
The PCE had suggested,
I think if I understand that submission correctly,
that those two bills could be managed by different administering
agencies. We would not agree with that for the reasons that I've just
set out.
Okay, well, thank you very much. Lan, actually, one quick question. Go for it.
I don't know if it's a quick question, but-
It's never a quick question.
We'll try and be quick to answer.
So, I'm not sure if you caught hearings earlier this morning, but we had
Professor Bronwyn Hayward from University of Canterbury talking
about she really struggled to find international
examples where these kind of mergers have actually
taken place and then had better outcomes for the environment.
Mm-hmm.
Are you aware with your international colleagues, in
agencies around the world where things like this
might have had better environmental outcomes?
It's not something that I'm aware of.
So I've worked in a number of different jurisdictions, and I've looked at a number
of different
other jurisdictions and their approaches. It's not something that I've come across.
Okay.
I don't think it's been flagged in any of our reports by officials either.
Okay. No.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thanks.
So we will now move to our next submitter, Zoran
Rakovic,
who is
joining us on live
and
Zoom?
Zoom online.
Zoom online, yeah.
Oh, there we go. We can see you, Zoran.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Good afternoon.
We'll hand it over to you. You have five minutes with us for your submission, so
over to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members of the committee, thank you for the chance to
speak. My name is
Zoran Rakovic. I'm a retired structural engineer from
Selwyn, and my submission is
less of an expert's view than
it's more of a common sense than lay person's
view. Selwyn is one of the fastest growing districts in the country, so
what you are deciding here will land directly in our
communities.
I'm not necessarily against merging ministries if it means housing,
transport, and environment are finally working together.
That could be a good thing. But here's the risk in simple terms.
When you put everything into one big department, the pressure to get
things built can start to outweigh the need to get
things right.
And in a place like Selwyn, that matters.
We are growing fast. Rolleston, Lincoln, Prebbleton,
new houses, new subdivisions. That puts pressure on
stormwater, flood protection, groundwater, and roads.
If those things aren't properly planned upfront, the problems don't disappear.
They show up later. Flooding, water quality issues,
bigger costs to fix the infrastructure that should've been done properly the first
time. And who pays? Local ratepayers.
That's the real issue, not growth itself, but unfunded or poorly
planned growthThis bill says the functions stay the
same, just moved to a different structure. But structure matters.
It affects priorities. It affects how decisions are made day to day.
If environmental expertise gets diluted, even slightly, those
trade-offs won't be as visible.
So my ask is simple.
If you're going to merge these agencies, put some guard rails in
place. Make sure there are still strong environmental experts in the
system. Make sure decisions are transparent so people can see how
trade-offs are made. And make sure that if development is
sped up, the cost of things like drainage, flood protection,
and water systems is properly accounted for, not pushed onto
existing communities later.
Because the reality is very simple.
Water still flows downhill. Pipes still have limits.
Flood plains still flood. Changing the structure in Wellington
doesn't change that. If this reform helps things line up
better, great. But if it leads to cutting corners,
Selwyn will be the one paying for it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Zoran, for that submission.
We appear to have no further questions on that, but we
appreciate you taking the time to submit to us today.
So thank you very much.
I appreciate your time. Thank you.
Very clear submission. So thank you.
Look, we're now going to move to Southern Young
Labour. There we are. We can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to
talk us through your submission. Thank you.
Kia ora koutou, and thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak
today on behalf of Southern Young Labour.
My name is Liam Calder, and I'm the vice president.
And on behalf of Southern Young Labour, we strongly oppose the
environment or the disestablishment of the Ministry of Environment Amendment Bill.
As representatives of rangatahi across the lower South Island, we speak
for a generation that will live with the long-term consequences
from the decisions that are made within the select committee room.
Environmental governance is not abstract to us, but it is the future
that we will inherit.
This bill proposes to disestablish the
Ministry of Environment at a time when coordinated long-term
environmental leadership is more critical than ever.
The Ministry of Environment plays a central role in providing
independent advice, coordinating across governments,
coordinating across elections even, and ensuring consistency in
environmental policy. Without it,
responsibility can remain fragmented, decision-making
risks become inconsistent, less transparency, and more
vulnerable to short-term political pressures.
For young people, this is deeply concerning.
Environmental challenges operate on decades-long
timelines, yet this bill weakens the institutional
capacity needed to plan beyond just three-year electoral
cycles. The environment should not be used as a
political football to streamline government.
We are already seeing the impacts of climate change in particular
regions that Southern Young Labour represent, especially across Otago and
Southland. Coastal communities, infrastructure, and
primary industries are increasingly exposed.
Effective responses require coordination and leadership,
not institutional retreat.
Weakening environmental institutions does not support growth.
It creates uncertainty and risks damaging to New Zealand's clean,
green international reputation.
Finally, this bill sends a message to young people that
environmental protection is negotiable, secondary,
or even pushed aside. For many of us, climate
change is a defining issue of our time.
Weakening environmental leadership risks deepening
political disengagement and eroding trust in public
institutions.
Therefore, on behalf of Southern Young Labour, we recommend that the committee
rejects this bill on the grounds that the disestablishment of the Ministry of
Environment would create environmental violations that could be
brushed under the carpet or lost within the new ministries of
cities, environments, regions and transport.
We also believe the Secretary of Environment would not be sufficient or
carry any political or legislative power to protect something that
relies on a voice for protection.
While we commend this attempt to introduce checks and balances,
we believe that this does not go far enough.
At a time of escalating environmental risk, New Zealand needs
stronger leadership, not less. We need robust
institutions, long-term thinking, and commitment to our future
generations. Our message is simple: do
not dismantle the structures that protect our future and our
mokopuna's future. Ngā mihi. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that submission and for the lovely graphics as
well on your submission there. Look, we're going to take one question from
an MP who may be known to you, Rachel Brooking.
Your electorate.
From the south.
Nice to see you, Liam. And the graphics for anybody watching,
there's a beautiful picture of their clock tower from the University of Otago, and
of course, the best electorate.
But Liam, you've talked a lot in the submission about
the difference between short-term thinking and long-term thinking.
So why is it that long-term thinking is important to Southern Young Labour?
Long-term thinking is,
many of us joined Southern Young Labour for a very transient period in our
lives.
Whether it's three years at university or they could be here for
long-term in Southern Young Labour.
But potentially we could be inheriting a future that goes just
beyond our lifetimes. It goes back to the saying of, "We plant
the tree that we'll never feel the shade of." It's all about protecting
something that doesn't necessarily have a voice for itself, and that's why
Southern Young Labour believes in standing up for the environment, for
the long-term shade,
the tree that we won't feel the shade of.
Beautifully said. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Liam, for your submission.
Appreciate your time this afternoon. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Ka kite. Bye-bye.
So we now move to our next submission, Nelson Tasman
Climate Forum.
Who will also be joining us online this afternoon.
Fred, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your
submission. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Tena koutou katoa.
Ko Fred Overmeyer toku ingoa. With me today is David Bartle.
He has a bug, so I'll be the main speaker.
We speak on behalf of the Nelson Tasman Climate Forum, and we thank you for this
important opportunity to present to you today.
In our presentation, while we acknowledge, value, and improve public service
integration, we'll make the case that MFE as the government's primary
advisor on climate and environment needs strengthening,
and that its proposed submergence through this bill in the new MCERT will have
the opposite effect and will generate higher costs.
We're now on the cusp of 1.5 degree C of global temperature rise.
Scientific evidence shows that global heating is accelerating.
Some predict 2 degree C by 2040,
unless urgent action is taken by humanity to change course.
We're now rapidly approaching multiple Earth tipping points that will
transform our world with devastating and irreversible consequences for
people and nature.
For example, collapse of the Greenland and West Antarctic Ice Sheets, global
permafrost thaw,
and slowdown of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation,
otherwise in short known as AMOC.
Because Earth's climate system is interconnected, Aotearoa,
New Zealand will not be immune to these consequences.
For example, sea level rise and the warming of our oceans as AMOC
declines.
The increasing frequency of severe weather events, most
notably the Auckland Anniversary Weekend floods and cycling three or three years
ago.
But as we've also seen, a summer of
storms,
with tragic loss of lives, livelihoods, and massive economic costs will, in
hindsight, look relatively benign events.
Noting its significance to yourselves as decision-makers, we
stress the point in our written submission that most
current economic assessments exclude many of the real-world impacts of climate
change,
such as these tipping points, sea level rise, mass migration,
human health impacts, and geopolitical risks.
It's now unequivocal that the costs of climate inaction far
exceeds the costs of taking climate action.
We note a recent UK Climate Change Committee report finding in
the last couple of weeks,
that reaching net zero by 2050 would be cheaper for the UK
than the single fossil fuel spike of 2022 associated with the
Ukraine War.
In short, we see a strong case for strengthening MFE as the government's primary
advisor on climate and environment to help us navigate the turbulent times ahead.
The key foundation in all of that will be achieving net negative
emissions.
We fear under the bill that climate and environment will be submerged in
the new MCERT, while the CEO will have the title of Secretary for
the Environment. In practice, based on the budget allocations of
MCERT's constituents and excluding industrial ETS
allocations that in reality are subsidies for climate pollution.
We estimate climate and environment to be a little more than 6% of the CEO's
responsibilities. To suggest that there will still be a
Secretary for the Environment is confusing at best.
Critically, the merger will submerge decisions of value judgments,
trade-offs between safe long-term environments and climate,
and largely short-term development considerations.
Maintaining transparency, openness, and a sense of public ownership in
environmental policy is worth a great deal.
Without a dedicated point of contact, public participation trust will likely
plummet.
We see potential for disruption to current priorities, such as the new planning
legislation, climate adaptation legislation, and revision of the
National Adaptation Plan.
Trade partners such as the EU, who cherish their environmental record, will be
dismayed by the change.
To conclude, the Nelson Tasman Climate Forum strongly opposes the
disestablishment of the Ministry for the Environment for reasons of
transparency, accountability, and its role for restoring our climate,
protecting nature to tire, and protecting future generations.
However,
if the committee is of a mind to recommend the bill proceed, and in a departure
from our written submission,
we recommend broadly following the Environmental Law Initiative
proposalTo establish the Secretary for the Environment as Deputy
Chief Executive of the new ministry with an exclusive mandate
and sufficient resources for its climate and environment responsibilities,
and to provide direction that the new ministry must
prioritize our national climate obligations and environmental
outcomes across all functions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, Fred. Look, you have met time with that
submission, so there aren't any further questions.
But look, we thank you for your time today, and it
doesn't actually look like Nelson there behind you either .
I'm sure it's sunny down there today
Much less here in Antarctica.
Yes. Thank you.
Now we welcome our next submitter,
Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, and I
understand the team is here, and we have Simon
joining us online from afar
as well. So just to acknowledge you all here today.
We'll just wait for Simon, the commissioner, to pop up.
He was there.
He popped up and then popped away again.
Keeps coming and going. You have a problem.
There we go. Welcome, Commissioner,
and welcome all to the select committee.
You have 10 minutes with us on this, so we'll hand it over to you to talk
us through your submission. So thank you.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Look, there's no right way to arrange government
departments, so anything can be made to work.
And if you want to get rid of the Ministry for the Environment, this is, from a
legal point of view, an elegant way. So that's good.
However, in my view, a separate ministry remains the best
way to ensure that environmental problems are properly addressed.
Unlike domains such as transport, housing or infrastructure, where there are
numerous private and public owners, operators and
interest groups, the environment doesn't have anyone that can
claim to own it.
All of us are dependent on the environment of which we're a part.
Now, in my view, it makes sense to have an agency whose job it is to
ensure
that the consequences for the environment of all our other policy interventions are
properly understood.
If we can justify a separate ministry for regulation,
we can certainly justify a separate ministry for the environment.
Now, as the officer of Parliament charged with keeping under review
the system of processes and agencies that make up our
environmental management system, my advice to
you is that this change is unlikely to help
the environment, and I want to underline three points briefly.
First,
bundling these agencies together undermines an important principle of
public sector advice, and that is the need for
contestability
so that elected officials, in other words, ministers, not public
servants, can confront and make the big trade-offs.
There's a real risk with a mega ministry that trade-offs will be resolved
within the organization, and that the differences will not
be aired with ministers, where accountability for those trade-offs
should rightly sit.
Now, neither the previous nor the current government have made a convincing case,
in my view, that to reform the RMA you need two acts.
But if you are all agreed that that's the right approach, then
surely it would make sense to have different ministries responsible
for the two different acts to ensure that the trade-offs between
them are properly presented.
Frankly, I don't have a lot of confidence in large, internal,
bureaucratic trade-off exercises.
A Ministry for the Environment overseeing a Natural Environment Act
would better ensure free and frank advice than a mega ministry
trying to reach a compromise it hopes all of its ministers can swallow.
There's also a transparency point that you as a select committee should seek advice
on.
Right now, the Ministry for the Environment has two appropriations, one for
environment, one for climate. You need to find out in this merged
ministry if there is going to be an appropriation for those
things.
With my EEE, which I bring to you once a year, my estimate of
environmental expenditure, I can tell you what's being spent on
those items from the budget.
I may not be able to do so anywhere near so easily if this is all just
put into a big blender and you can't see what's being spent
on the environment.
Okay, my second point. If you believe that a smaller
number of mega ministries is better, then you should at least be
prepared to consider merging MFE with MPI.
Now, that may shock some people, and it's not my first preference.
After all, many of our most pressing environmental problems are associated
with primary industries like water quality, greenhouse gas
emissions and erosion. So I suppose there could be a problem for free and
frank advice about those problems if you put those together.
But look at it another way. The current proposal is to create
a very urban-focused ministry. It seems to have been the
inspiration of people who live in cities and see the environment as being
all about cars and houses and urban design and infrastructure.
But the vast bulk of the natural environment is outside of cities.
Most of New Zealand is rural,
and I think rural people are much closer to the natural environment.
They work in it.
Forests, farms, vineyards, they all rely directly
on the health of the environment and climate.
And MPI understands that. It's got serious technical
capabilities in areas like biosecurity and animal health that are
much closer to the natural environment than people advising on
how many apartments you can squeeze around a bus stop.Now, I
worry that this agency won't understand
rural New Zealand and the people who live and work there.
In short, the merger facilitated by this bill treats the
environment as though it were a branch of planning law.
It isn't. The environment intersects with every corner
of public policy.
Which brings me to my third and final point.
If ever there was a time to avoid an upheaval, it's in the middle of a
massive legislative reform, which you as a committee are
overseeing. Officials will already have their hands
full trying to make complex new legislation
work and develop national direction across a bewildering
array of topics. It's the worst time for
people to be sizing up new managers and reapplying for their
jobs. Furthermore, the government has decided to upend
regional councils, which will cause even more uncertainty for
the implementation of new law.
And as I've said in respect to that reform, form should
follow function. The same applies here.
If there's a need to tinker with the departmental Lego
set, it should happen after new functions have been
determined and legislated for. So there you are.
That is my frank advice to you on this initiative.
Well, thank you, Simon, for that very passionate submission.
Look, you've opened up a flurry of questions around the table here.
So look, we will start with Rachel.
Well, we know that we can always rely on frank
advice
from you. Thank you. But I've just got
one question to start with, and that is, you're talking about this contestability
and ministers going head-to-head on issues, and the
word trade-off is used a lot, and I know it's one I use a lot as well.
But can you give us some examples of the type of trade-offs that you are imagining
there?
There's an unlimited number, and I'm sure you can imagine them.
But you take transport, for instance.
You've got climate consequences, you've got congestion
consequences, you've got economic consequences, you've got social consequences.
What's public, what's private?
Or you take water. You need water for irrigation.
You need water for drinking. You need water to protect the ecology.
These are all complicated issues where
different parts of our society, whether we're urban dwellers or rural,
whether we're after water for industry or we're trying to protect a local park or
whatever, we've all got claims on this thing called the
environment. And the environment hasn't got anyone who can
say, "Well, actually, I own the environment, and I can give you my view." You
need a ministry, or if you're going to have this mega one, you need a
very clearly defined entity that can provide specific
advice on the environment. And if I just underline this point
again, if you can't even tell how much money you're spending on that
in a blurred ministry, I think you should be concerned.
Thank you. And Francisco.
Thank you, Chair.
Would you agree with the advice that the government has gotten around this,
that given the proposed agency would be development oriented, there's a
particular risk of environment functions and perspectives being lost?
And if you agree with that, how would you recommend they mitigate that?
Inevitably, there will be that tension brought in-house.
That tension exists, I remind you, right now around the Cabinet table where
ministers are discussing things.
What, as I've just said, what you're doing by pulling this all together is
that you make the tensions and the trade-offs less
transparent. There isn't
an agency which can give clear advice just from an
environmental point of view. We all accept there have to be trade-offs, and we all
accept that development will involve trade-offs.
We need to know what they are. It needs to come from an agency
that can provide that clearly and transparently.
I think it's easiest done if you have a separate ministry for the environment.
Thank you.
Thank you, Simon. Look, we'll go to Grant now.
Yeah. G'day, Simon. You highlight, for example,
will the new ministry,
the super ministry, understand rural New Zealand? Okay.
If that's where we end up with the new ministry, which is
where we're heading, what advice could you give to
help prevent that happening? Any thoughts in that space?
I don't have advice for that because I think you'd make it very difficult for
yourselves.
You will have an entity which is heavily focused
on the spatial planning side of things and the urban side.
Now look, that is important.
You've heard me be critical of two acts, but
one good thing about spatial planning is that we can bring stuff together.
The problem is that you have put that in an
agency
alongside the entity which is looking after the environment
and a lot of that rural stuff. You've put that all together.
So it's hard to see why the weight of stuff
won't go in that direction. This is just a straight contestability issue.
And I wasn't being facetious when I said why not look at
MPI, MFE. I mean, I could understand the case for wanting
fewer ministries and fewer chief executive salaries, I suppose, a
few other things. But
rural New Zealand
is living face to face with all of those challenges around water and
biodiversity and so on and so forth.
And actually, I'm very impressed by MPI in many ways.
I think it's an agency with serious technical skill.
Whatever technical skill exists inside this ministry won't
be technical skill around the natural environment in the way that an agency
like MPI can bring to the table.
But again, if you're going to go down this road, I think it's very
important that you can see transparently what the
appropriation is for environment and also for climate, by the
way, so you know what's being spent and you can drill this
major domo who's going to be running it all, the chief executive, you can drill
that person on, okayHow are you
mobilising the resources we're giving you for the environment?
If that's all lost in a single appropriation, I think your job gets
even harder as a select committee.
I might just jump in there, Simon, because you talked about departmental Lego set.
I suppose the point of this is to bring everything together in one
so that there's less duplication, it's more streamlined, it's a bit more
efficiency.
So I'm hearing from you that you're not necessarily opposed to the kind
of mergers into one to create more efficiency, but just not with
transport, housing, and environment. That's not where you think it should sit.
Am I correct in saying that?
Absolutely. Absolutely. As I said right at the beginning, there's no right way to
arrange government departments.
But you could ask the question, why isn't LINZ part of this merger?
Land Information New Zealand, spatial planning, information.
This is all logically connected.
I think it's the wrong way to think about it, how could we arrange the
Lego? I'd look at form and function. What are you trying to achieve?
Yeah.
What the government's currently trying to achieve through spatial planning is
integrating
some very important functions, and I think that this ministry could do that well.
But it's also trying to achieve something environmental,
which is a bit different.
Mm.
And so keeping those two apart, I think, would be a better
plan.
Okay, thank you, Simon. One last question from Priyanka.
Just super quick, since you've suggested alternatives, Simon,
we had a submitter who suggested that MFE, Climate Change, and
DOC could go together. What are your thoughts on that?
I don't agree with that. DOC is an operational department.
It's a big, big, big land manager, and it needs a lot
of real technical advice and land management advice.
Now they're looking after tracks, they're looking after tourism concessions,
all of that stuff. It is a real operational department.
What we're talking about here are policy departments.
Mm.
And I think it's a question
of deciding what policy areas you should
pull together, and there may well be other
agencies you could put with MFE if you wanted to.
But I wouldn't recommend that one, actually. I think it's chalk and cheese.
Okay. Thanks.
Look, thank you very much, Simon, and to your team, for
the submission today. We've heard-
Thank you
... your message loud and clear, so thank you for that.
So we're now going to move into private session.
That ends our